# Powerless Women or Defeated Man: Exploring Depictions of Gender in Edgar Allen Poe's Short Stories

## Introduction

 Edgar Allan Poe is a writer and a poet of the 19th century, best known for his poem The Raven and his other writings about the dark and macabre. Already familiar with some of his works, and deeply interested in the gruesome themes of them, I decided to explore a collection of twenty-two of his short stories for this project. There is no particular order, genre, or categorization to this particular collection of short stories. This is because I had many ideas of what I could do comparatively, if these stories were not constrained by any similar topics, and if I was not completely biased in what I already had knowledge of. I had ideas to possibly analyze symbolism, characters, or common themes across these stories, to see the similarities and differences between them all. However, after reading that one of Poe’s theories was that the death of a beautiful woman is inarguably the most poetic topic in the world, I had a better idea (Martens 8). I wanted to look into his depiction of gender roles in his stories, with his theory in mind. I began with close reading and noticed patterns in his depictions of gender. In many cases, the man was the main character, but also, very hyper masculine, full of anger and violence. When a story did include a female, or in the extremely rare occasion, had her as a main character, they would become victims to male violence, or used only as a plot device to further the male narrative. Therefore, I argue that In Edgar Allen Poe’s short stories, females are objectified, depicted only by their physical characteristics or their helplessness in relation to the man in the story, while men are always in the forefront as the possessors of power.


To get an objective of what I wanted to look for within my data analysis, I began by close reading and reviewing some literary articles written on the topic at hand. Aside from Poe’s affinity to dead women in his theory, he emphasizes that the woman has to be beautiful, but also dead (Martens 8). I was inclined to believe from this that a woman’s outer beauty was very important to Poe, and would show up as a device in his stories where there were female characters or if a female was mentioned. In a close reading of “Eleonora”, one of the only stories in my corpus that has a female main character, I did notice that Poe was focused on writing about what I thought he saw as inner and outer beauty. He described Eleonora as “innocent”, “lovely”, “sweet”, and not surprisingly, dead. Taking note of these descriptive words in relation to the main female character, I wanted to see in my computational literary analysis if this happens across all stories with female characters. I suspected that the more the story was focused on a female character, the more adjectives there would be. As my argument focuses a lot on the objectification and utilization of the female as plot devices to further the male narrative, I wanted to know if this shows up in sentence patterns or in a syntactic analysis, even though it was evident in close reading. This concept is exemplified best in “The Purloined Letter”, a story in my corpus about a woman who got her letter stolen from her. Although the story revolves around her letter, she is mentioned only 7 times throughout the whole story. She is only used as the helpless maiden while the masculine, main man, detective Dupin, is painted as the hero (Martens 22). In completing my analysis, I plan to see the context surrounding male and female characters and how both are used within the plot through contextual based analysis, using tools such as concordances, ngrams, and lexical dispersion plots.
